            ASSIGNMENT --2

AIM. : House price prediction system linear & Ensemble models.

Keywords: house price prediction, machine learning, ensemble learning, support vector machine, gradient boost, random 
forest, CatBoost.


1. Introduction
In today’s society, the real estate market is constantly a hot topic. Housing is critical to one’s development. People 
are responsible when it comes to spending and economic approaches when currently looking for a new property. The 
real estate market is rapidly growing due to the growth of the economy. Because the price of housing is controlled by 
emerging markets and a variety of other factors. There are many factors that influence the price of homes. Buyers, on 
the other hand, are particularly sensitive to price fluctuations. Investors need to be aware of business trends to ensure 
that underwriting can be done correctly and that business output is augmented. 
The main purpose of the project is to forecast home price volatility to determine the best methodology for predicting house prices with less inappropriate data through the use of appropriate algorithms. This estimate is 

consistent with house prices for nonhomeowners based on their financial resources and objectives. Predicted prices will 

indeed be generated by analyzing the preceding merchandise, fare ranges, and forewarning developments. Developing a 

high-accuracy model is feasible for researchers who have confidence in the data set.

2. Related work
Real estate is not only a vital engine for economic growth, but it is also a major source of concern for the general 
public. People’s attention to house prices continues to increase dramatically with increasing housing demand. The real 
estate sector has emerged as something of a competitive and opaque market [1]. Alternative approaches to forecasting 
property prices based on all intrinsic and extrinsic factors that contributed to the price without any fluctuations have 
been developed over time [2]. Although the data provided play a part in determining the best future prediction model. 
Our methodology examines a set of parameters specified by the customer in determining the most effective pricing for 
their needs and desires [3]. The price of a property might fluctuate by location, area, amenities, and other characteristics, 
and researchers have been trying to find the best possible predictive model to forecast that price over the past decade 
[4]. Various approaches to estimating the property price employing various models and a combination of models were 
identified in our literature review. As a result, providing accurate house price estimates is crucial [5]. Multiple factors 
influence housing prices, including time and space, house age, surrounding conditions, communities, transportation, 
and so on. Existing forecasting models are often single predictors, i.e., the prediction is made using only one forecasting 
model. When data sets are noisy, this model’s prediction accuracy is not strong sufficient [6].

3.Proposed method
Several machine learning methods are implemented in the proposed framework (Figure 1), which is then assembled 
into the voting classifier. Various machine learning classifications are analyzed and compared, and their results were 
reported.

4.Ensemble learning techniques :
An ensemble is basically a combination of decisions from various models to make decisions that help in improving 
the accuracy of predicting the results.
The major divisions/methods in ensemble learning, namely Bagging, Boosting, and Stacking methods. This paper 
mainly focuses on Bagging and Boosting techniques in order to achieve high accuracy scores.
Gradient Boost. We’re utilizing gradient boost for regression when we use it to predict a continuous value. This 
is distinct from the use of linear regression. By translating data into a tree representation, the decision tree tackles the 
problem of machine learning. It consists of internal nodes for each attribute and the leaf node is represented as the class 
level. In most cases, the loss function is the squared error.
XGBoost. A gradient boost framework is used in XGBoost, which is one of the ensemble techniques. It’s a 
gradient-boosting method that minimizes over-fittings and bias by combining parallel processing, tree pruning, missing 
value management, and regularization. XGBoost uses ensemble learning to forecast a single value, which takes into 
account a set of models known as base learners. Because not all base learners are expected to make poor predictions, the 
poor guesses are balanced out by the outstanding predictions when they are combined together.
AdaBoost. The AdaBoost is a regression approach that uses both “simple” and “weak” classifiers to create a “strong” 
classifier. The algorithm fits a regression to the initial data set, then fits multiple copies of the regression to the alike data 
set, weighing each instance according to the current prediction’s error.
CatBoost. In boosting, multiple weak models are sequentially integrated and a strong competitive predictor is 

5. Conclusion 

From the results obtained from experimenting with different models. Using ensemble techniques like CatBoost and 

XGBoost has improved the accuracy of the model drastically when compared to simple regression techniques. These 

algorithms can be used in developing a web application where we could deploy these models for real-life analysis.

This process includes extracting relevant features from the data set. The merits of ensemble learning techniques are 

that it improves the accuracy compared to the traditional models by solving the problem of overfitting and being robust 

to outliers.

After applying the machine learning techniques (linear regression, KNN, SVM) and ensemble techniques (XGB 

regressor, AdaBoost, gradient boost regressor, random forest, CatBoost) ensemble learning techniques are giving the 

best result for both Ames and King County data sets. In ensemble learning techniques, CatBoost is giving the best result.

RMSE, MSE, MAE, and R2

 are the four factors that are considered in determining the accuracy of each of the 

models. The data set used here is a publicly available data set based on Ames housing.
